# Installation Guide


This course will require that your laptop has all necessary software
downloaded and installed **before** our first lecture. This will likely
only take ~30 minutes to complete, but please do this process in advance
in case you run into issues!

![Artwork by Allison Horst](./images/plan-on-it.jpg)

## Step 1. R and RStudio

You will need to install (or update to) the most recent versions of R
and RStudio. You can find links to download both programs here
<https://posit.co/download/rstudio-desktop/>. Make sure to install the
**free** version of RStudio!

Once you have both installed on your local machine, open RStudio. It
will automatically connect with the version of R you have installed and
you should see the following at the top of the console:

``` r
R version 4.5.1 (2025-06-13) -- "Great Square Root"
Copyright (C) 2025 The R Foundation for Statistical Computing
```

## Step 2. R packages

You will then need to install (or update) the R packages we will be
using regularly in this class. To install these packages, copy the
following code into the RStudio Console and press “Enter.”

``` r
install.packages("tidyverse")
```

``` r
install.packages("cowplot)
```

## Step 3. Slack

Please install [Slack](https://slack.com/downloads/) and join the [UCLA
Workspace](http://ucla.slack.com/). Stepfanie will then be able to add
you to our private Slack channel. **This will be the primary form of
communication for this course.**

If you’ve done this correctly, you should see that you’re signed into
the UCLA Workspace in the upper left corner:

![Slack screenshot](./images/slack-image.png)

## Step 4. GitHub

Create a [GitHub](https://github.com/) account using your UCLA email.
Make sure to [put some thought into your
username](https://happygitwithr.com/github-acct.html#username-advice)!

Finally, download and install Git on your local machine:
<https://git-scm.com/downloads>

## Step 5. Brief survey

Please complete this brief survey so I can get a sense for your
experience level: <https://forms.gle/EaJewWijdV29kjcB8>
